



%!target: html
%!postproc: '(?i)(<head>)' '\1\n<TITLE>openModeller</TITLE>'
%! style: om.css
%! encoding: utf-8

%!include: menu.t2t

Do you know any interesting publication that mentions openModeller? You can share it with other users by subscribing to the [users mailing list http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/openmodeller-users] and sending a message about it. We will be happy to include a reference here. The following list is very far from being complete. It is intended to show some examples of how openModeller was used and developed over time. Please use specific search engines for a more accurate list of openModeller citations, such as [Google Scholar http://scholar.google.com.br/scholar?q=openmodeller].

-------------------------------------

=== openModeller: a generic approach to species’ potential distribution modelling ===

Please use the following reference if you need to cite openModeller in a publication:

Muñoz, M.E.S., Giovanni, R., Siqueira, M.F., Sutton, T., Brewer, P., Pereira, R.S., Canhos, D.A.L. & Canhos, V.P. (2009) "openModeller: a generic approach to species' potential distribution modelling".  GeoInformatica. DOI: 10.1007/s10707-009-0090-7

http://www.springerlink.com/content/n805714x26265573/fulltext.html

-------------------------------------

=== Seeking the flowers for the bees: Integrating biotic interactions into niche models to assess the distribution of the exotic bee species Lithurgus huberi in South America ===

Silva, D.P., Gonzalez, V.H., Melo, G.A.R., Lucia, M., Alvarez, L.J. and De Marco P. (2014) "Seeking the flowers for the bees: Integrating biotic interactions into niche models to assess the distribution of the exotic bee species Lithurgus huberi in South America". Ecological Modelling, 273: 200-209.

=== Species distribution modelling as a macroecological tool: a case study using New World amphibians ===

Vasconcelos, T.S., Rodríguez, M.Á. & Hawkins, B.A. (2011) "Species distribution modelling as a macroecological tool: a case study using New World amphibians". Ecography, 34: 001-010. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0587.2011.07050.x 

=== Mapping potential distribution of slender loris subspecies in peninsular India ===

Honnavalli N. Kumara, Mohammed Irfan-Ullah and Shanthala Kumar (2009). "Mapping potential distribution of slender loris subspecies in peninsular India". Endangered Species Research, Vol. 7: 29–38. DOI: 10.3354/esr00185

http://www.int-res.com/articles/esr2009/7/n007p029.pdf  
   
=== Shifting Global Invasive Potential of European Plants with Climate Change ===

A. Townsend Peterson, Aimee Stewart, Kamal I. Mohamed and Miguel B.  Araújo (2008). "Shifting Global Invasive Potential of European Plants with Climate Change". PLoS ONE, Vol. 3(6): e2441. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002441

http://specify5.specifysoftware.org/Informatics/bios/biostownpeterson/Petal_PLOSONE_2008.pdf
    
=== Rethinking receiver operating characteristic analysis applications in ecological niche modelling ===

A. Townsend Peterson, Monica Papeş and Jorge Soberón (2008). "Rethinking receiver operating characteristic analysis applications in ecological niche modelling". Ecological Modelling, 213(1): 63-72. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2007.11.008

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2007.11.008

=== How Global Is the Global Biodiversity Information Facility? ===

Yesson C, Brewer PW, Sutton T, Caithness N, Pahwa JS, et al. (2007) How Global Is the Global Biodiversity Information Facility?. PLoS ONE 2(11): e1124 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001124

=== Introducing openModeller - A fundamental niche modelling framework ===

Tim Sutton, Renato de Giovanni, Marinez Ferreira de Siqueira. Introducing openModeller - A fundamental niche modelling framework. OSGeo Journal Volume 1. ISSN 1994-1897.

http://www.osgeo.org/files/journal/final_pdfs/OSGeo_vol1_openModeller.pdf

=== Web Service for Cooperation in Biodiversity Modeling ===

Fook, K. D., Monteiro, A. M. V., Câmara, G. (2006). Web Service for Cooperation in Biodiversity Modeling. In: VIII Brazilian Symposium on GeoInformatics, GEOINFO, Campos do Jordão. Brazilian Symposium on GeoInformatics, GEOINFO, 2006. v. 8.

http://www.geoinfo.info/geoinfo2006/papers/p40.pdf

=== Phyloclimatic Modeling: Combining Phylogenetics and Bioclimatic Modeling ===

Yesson, C and Culham A. 2006. Phyloclimatic Modeling: Combining Phylogenetics and Bioclimatic Modeling. Syst Biol. 55(5): 788-802.

=== A Phyloclimatic Study of Cyclamen ===

Yesson, C., and Culham, A. 2006. A phyloclimatic study of Cyclamen.  BMC Evolutionary Biology 6:72.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/6/72

=== openModeller - an open framework for ecological niche modeling: analysis and future improvements ===

Santana, F. S., Fonseca, R. R., Saraiva, A. M., Corrêa, P. L. P., Bravo, C., Giovanni, R., "openModeller - an open framework for ecological niche modeling: analysis and future improvements", 2006 World Conference on Computers in Agriculture and Natural Resources (WCCA).

=== Accessing Biodiversity Resources in Computational Environments from Workflow Applications ===

J. S. Pahwa, R. J. White, A. C. Jones, M. Burgess, W. A.  Gray, N. J. Fiddian, T. Sutton, P. Brewer, C. Yesson, N.  Caithness, A. Culham, F. A. Bisby, M. Scoble, P.  Williams, and S. Bhagwat, "Accessing Biodiversity Resources in Computational Environments from Workflow Applications", Workshop on Workflows in Support of Large-Scale Science (in conjunction with the 15th IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing), Paris, France, June 20, 2006.

=== Biodiversity World: A Problem-Solving Environment for Analysing Biodiversity Patterns ===

J. S. Pahwa, P. Brewer, T. Sutton, C. Yesson, M.  Burgess, X. Xu, A. C. Jones, R. J. White, W. A. Gray, N.  J. Fiddian, F. A. Bisby, A. Culham, N. Caithness, M.  Scoble, P. Williams and S. Bhagwat, "Biodiversity World: A Problem-Solving Environment for Analysing Biodiversity Patterns", in Proc. 6th IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGRID 2006), Singapore, May 16–19, 2006.

=== Novel methods improve prediction of species' distributions from occurrence data ===

Elith, J., C.H. Graham, R.P. Anderson, M. Dudik, S.  Ferrier, A. Guisan, R.J. Hijmans, F. Huettmann, J.R.  Leathwick, A. Lehmann, J Li, L.G. Lohmann, B.A.  Loiselle, G. Manion, G. Moritz, M. Nakamura, Y.  Nakazawa, J. McC. Overton, A.T. Peterson, S.J. Phillips, K. Richardson, R. Scachetti-Pereira, R.E. Schapire, J.  Soberón, S. Williams, M.S. Wisz, and N.E. Zimmermann.  2006. Novel methods improve prediction of species' distributions from occurrence data. Ecography 29:129-151. Link: http://www.blackwell-synergy.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.2006.0906-7590.04596.x?cookieSet=1

-------------------------------------
Last updated on %%mtime(%d %B %Y)
