openModeller

Compilation guide for openModeller
%! target       : html
%! style        : w3c_main.css
%! style        : w3c_examples.css
%! Options      : --toc --toc-level 3 --enum-title --css-sugar --css-inside
%! preproc      : OM_URL   http://openmodeller.sf.net/
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(<pre>)' '<div class="exampleInner">\1'
%! PostProc(html): '(?i)(</pre>)' '\1</div>'
%! encoding: iso-8859-1



% These are comments and will not be generated in any output
% -------------------

%This document is in text2tags format. You can generate html, plain text and
%moinmoin formatted documentation by running txt2tags on this document. See the
%txt2tags home page for more details.  Please insert manual line breaks in this
%document as it makes diffing for changes much easier. To do this in vim 
%automatically, select a section then issue (gq) command. Please dont
%apply vim formatting to the whole document as it screws up some formatting
%rather apply it selectively to paragraphs where needed.

% To generate teh text version of this document:
% txt2tags -t txt --toc --enum-title -o INSTALL  INSTALL.t2t
% To generate the moinmoin version of this document
% txt2tags -t moin --toc --enum-title -o INSTALL.moin  INSTALL.t2t

% End of comments
% -------------------


= Introduction =

This document is the original installation guide of the described software 
openModeller. The software and hardware descriptions named in this 
document are in most cases registered trademarks and are therefore subject 
to the legal requirements. openModeller is subject to the GNU General Public 
License. Find more information on the openModeller Homepage:
OM_URL

The details, that are given in this document have been written and verified 
to the best of knowledge and responsibility of the editors. Nevertheless, 
mistakes concerning the content are possible. Therefore, all data are not 
liable to any duties or guarantees. The editors and publishers do not take 
any responsibility or liability for failures and their consequences. You are 
always welcome for indicating possible mistakes.

% You can download this document as part of the openModeller 'User and 
% Installation Guide' in HTML and PDF format via OM_URL. A current 
% version is also available at the wiki, see:
% http://wiki.openmodeller.org/openmodellerwiki/BuildingFromSource 

% Translations of this document can also be downloaded at the documentation area 
% of the openModeller project at OM_URL. More information is 
%available via http://wiki.openmodeller.org/openmodellerwiki/DocumentationWritersCorner. 

Please visit http://openmodeller.sf.net for information on joining our mailing lists 
and getting involved in the project further.

/!\ *****Note:***** This is a 'cut and paste' tutorial - in most cases you can
simply copy the commands listed in codeblocks that look like this:

```
somecommand to be pasted 
```

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% ----Please leave this break marker here for clarity - it wont be rendered ---
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

= General Build Notes = 

At version 0.5.2 openModeller no longer uses the autotools for building. openModeller, like a
number of major projects (eg. KDE 4.0), now uses cmake for building from
source. The configure script in this directory simply checks for the existence
of cmake and provides some clues to build openModeller.

== An overview of the dependencies required for building ==

**Required build deps:**

 - CMake >= 2.4.3

**Required runtime deps:**
 
 - Proj >= ? (known to work with 4.4.x)
 - Sqlite3 >= ? (probably 3.0.0)
 - GDAL/OGR >= ? (1.2.x should work)

**Optional dependencies:**
 
 - for CSM algorithm - GSL >= ? (works with 1.8)
 - for terralib support - terralib >= ??






% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% ----Please leave this break marker here for clarity - it wont be rendered ---
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

= Building on Mac OSX using frameworks and cmake =


In this approach I will try to avoid as much as possible building dependencies
from source and rather use frameworks wherever possible.

== Install XCODE ==

I recommend to get the latest xcode dmg from the Apple XDC Web site. Install
XCODE after the ~941mb download is complete.


== Install development frameworks for openModeller dependencies ==

Download William Kyngesburye's excellent all in one framework that includes
proj, gdal, sqlite3 etc

``` 
http://www.kyngchaos.com/files/software/unixport/AllFrameworks.dmg 
```

Once downloaded, open and install the frameworks.

William provides an additional installer package for Postgresql/PostGIS. Its
available here:

``` 
http://www.kyngchaos.com/software/unixport/postgres 
```

There are some additional dependencies that at the time of writing are not
provided as frameworks so we will need to build these from source.

=== Additional Dependencies : GSL ===

Retrieve the Gnu Scientific Library from

``` 
curl -O ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gsl/gsl-1.8.tar.gz 
```

Then extract it and build it to a prefix of /usr/local:

``` 
tar xvfz gsl-1.8.tar.gz 
cd gsl-1.8 
./configure --prefix=/usr/local 
make
sudo make install
cd ..  
```

=== Additional Dependencies : Expat ===

Get the expat sources:

``` 
http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=10127 
```

```
tar xvfz expat-2.0.0.tar.gz 
cd expat-2.0.0 
./configure --prefix=/usr/local
make 
sudo make install 
cd ..  
```

== Install CMAKE for OSX ==

Get the latest release from here:

``` 
http://www.cmake.org/HTML/Download.html 
```

At the time of writing the file I grabbed was:

``` 
curl -O http://www.cmake.org/files/v2.4/cmake-2.4.6-Darwin-universal.dmg
```

Once downloaded open the dmg and run the installer

== Install subversion for OSX ==

The [http://sourceforge.net/projects/macsvn/ MacSVN] project has a downloadable
build of svn. If you are a GUI inclined person you may want to grab their gui
client too. Get the command line client here:

``` 
curl -O http://ufpr.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge/macsvn/Subversion_1.4.2.zip 
```


Once downloaded open the zip file and run the installer.

You also need to install BerkleyDB available from the same
[http://sourceforge.net/projects/macsvn/ website]. At the time of writing the
file was here:

``` 
curl -O http://ufpr.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge/macsvn/Berkeley_DB_4.5.20.zip 
```

Once again unzip this and run the installer therein.

Lastly we need to ensure that the svn commandline executeable is in the path.
Add the following line to the end of /etc/bashrc using sudo:

``` 
sudo vim /etc/bashrc 
```

And add this line to the bottom before saving and quiting:

``` 
export PATH=/usr/local/bin:$PATH:/usr/local/pgsql/bin 
```

/usr/local/bin needs to be first in the path so that the newer bison (that will
be built from source further down) is found before the bison (which is very
old) that is installed by MacOSX


Now close and reopen your shell to get the updated vars.

== Check out openModeller from SVN ==

Now we are going to check out the sources for openModeller. First we will create a
directory for working in:

``` 
mkdir -p ~/dev/cpp 
cd ~/dev/cpp 
```

Now we check out the sources:

Trunk:
``` 
svn co https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/openmodeller/trunk/openmodeller
```

The first time you check out openModeller sources you will probably get a message like
this:

``` 
 Error validating server certificate for 'https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net:443':
 - The certificate is not issued by a trusted authority. Use the fingerprint to
   validate the certificate manually!  Certificate information:
 - Hostname: openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net
 - Valid: from Apr  1 00:30:47 2006 GMT until Mar 21 00:30:47 2008 GMT
 - Issuer: Developer Team, openModeller, Anchorage, Alaska, US
 - Fingerprint: 2f:cd:f1:5a:c7:64:da:2b:d1:34:a5:20:c6:15:67:28:33:ea:7a:9b
   (R)eject, accept (t)emporarily or accept (p)ermanently?  
```

I suggest you press 'p' to accept the key permanently.

== Configure the build ==

CMake supports out of source build so we will create a 'build' dir for the
build process. By convention I build the software into /usr/local
in my home directory. 

``` 
cd openmodeller 
mkdir build 
cd build 
cmake -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
```

Now compile ...

``` 
make 
```

If all built without errors you can then install it:

``` 
sudo make install 
```

Ensure that /usr/local/bin is in your path and then you can use the 
openModeller command line tools as per normal.

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% ----Please leave this break marker here for clarity - it wont be rendered ---
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

= Building on GNU/Linux (apt based distro) =

***Requires:*** Ubuntu Edgy / Debian derived distro

These notes are for if you want to build openModeller from source. One of the major
aims here is to show how this can be done using binary packages for ***all***
dependencies - building only the core openModeller stuff from source. I prefer this
approach because it means we can leave the business of managing system packages
to apt and only concern ourselves with coding openModeller! 

This document assumes you have made a fresh install and have a 'clean' system.
These instructions should work fine if this is a system that has already been
in use for a while, you may need to just skip those steps which are irrelevant
to you.



== Prepare apt ==

The packages openmodeller depends on to build are available in the "universe" component
of Ubuntu. This is not activated by default, so you need to activate it:

 + Edit your /etc/apt/sources.list file.  
 + Uncomment the all the lines starting with "deb"

Also you will need to be running (K)Ubuntu 'edgy' or higher in order for 
all dependencies to be met.

Now update your local sources database:

``` 
sudo apt-get update 
```


== Install software dependencies required by openModeller ==

``` 
sudo apt-get install gdal-bin libgdal1-dev proj \
libgdal-doc libhdf4g-dev libhdf4g-run \
libgsl0-dev g++ libjasper-1.701-dev libtiff4-dev subversion \
libsqlite3-dev sqlite3 ccache make cmake txt2tags 
```

/!\ Debian users should use libgdal-dev above rather

== Setup ccache (Optional) ==

You should also setup ccache to speed up compile times:

``` 
cd /usr/local/bin 
sudo ln -s /usr/bin/ccache gcc 
sudo ln -s /usr/bin/ccache g++ 
```

== Prepare your development environment ==

As a convention I do all my development work in $HOME/dev/<language>, so in
this case we will create a work environment for C++ development work like
this:

``` 
mkdir -p ${HOME}/dev/cpp 
cd ${HOME}/dev/cpp 
```

This directory path will be assumed for all instructions that follow.


== Check out the openModeller Source Code ==


``` 
cd ${HOME}/dev/cpp 
svn co https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/openmodeller/trunk/openmodeller
```

The first time you check out the source you will be prompted to accept the
openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net certificate. Press 'p' to accept it permanently:

``` 
Error validating server certificate for 'https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net:443':
   - The certificate is not issued by a trusted authority. Use the
     fingerprint to validate the certificate manually!  Certificate
     information:
   - Hostname: openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net
   - Valid: from Apr  1 00:30:47 2006 GMT until Mar 21 00:30:47 2008 GMT
   - Issuer: Developer Team, openModeller, Anchorage, Alaska, US
   - Fingerprint:
     2f:cd:f1:5a:c7:64:da:2b:d1:34:a5:20:c6:15:67:28:33:ea:7a:9b (R)eject,
     accept (t)emporarily or accept (p)ermanently?  
```

== Starting the compile ==

I compile my development version of openModeller into the default /usrl/local directory to avoid
conflicts with Ubuntu packages that may be under /usr. 


Now we create a build directory and run ccmake:

```
cd openmodeller
mkdir build
cd build
ccmake ..
```

When you run ccmake (note the .. is required!), a menu will appear where 
you can configure various aspects of the build. If you do not have root
access or do not want to overwrite existing openModeller installs (by your
packagemanager for example), set the CMAKE_BUILD_PREFIX to somewhere you
have write access to (I usually use /home/timlinux/apps). Now press
'c' to configure, 'e' to dismiss any error messages that may appear.
and 'g' to generate the make files. Note that sometimes 'c' needs to 
be pressed several times before the 'g' option becomes available.
After the 'g' generation is complete, press 'q' to exit the ccmake 
interactive dialog.

Now on with the build:

```
make
make install
```

It may take a little while to build depending on your platform.

== Running openModeller ==

Now you can try to run openModeller:

``` 
om_console
```

If all has worked properly the openModeller application should start with a 
message giving useage instructions.

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% ----Please leave this break marker here for clarity - it wont be rendered ---
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

= Building under windows using MSYS =

== MSYS: ==

**IMPORTANT: This section is here for historical reasons, because in ancient** 
**times there was an attempt to use this approach to generate the Windows version** 
**of openModeller. Until now, no official version of openModeller was ever** 
**released for Windows using MSYS. All official versions were generated with**
**MSVC (see next section).**

MSYS provides a unix style build environment under windows. We have created a
zip archive that contains just about all dependencies.

Get this: 

http://qgis.org/uploadfiles/msys/msys.zip

and unpack to c:\msys

/!\ **Note:** If you wish to build the dependencies yourself, detailed notes 
are available in the QGIS source tree INSTALL document.

== Subversion: ==

In order to check out openModeller sources from the repository, you need Subversion
client. This installer should work fine:

http://subversion.tigris.org/files/documents/15/36797/svn-1.4.3-setup.exe

/!\ **Note:** You **must** use a command line svn client because its used by cmake during 
the build process.

== CMake: ==

CMake is build system used by openModeller. Download it from here:

http://www.cmake.org/files/v2.4/cmake-2.4.6-win32-x86.exe

/!\ **Note:** Get the most recent version.

== openModeller: ==

Start a cmd.exe window ( Start -> Run -> cmd.exe ) Create development 
directory and move into it

``` 
md c:\dev\cpp 
cd c:\dev\cpp 
```
   
Check out sources from SVN trunk:

``` 
svn co https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/openmodeller/trunk/openmodeller

```


== Compiling: ==


Start a cmd.exe window ( Start -> Run -> cmd.exe ) if you don't have one
already.  Add paths to compiler and our MSYS environment:
  
``` 
cd c:\dev\cpp\openmodeller 
md build 
cd build 
```

== Configuration ==

```
cmakesetup ..  
```

/!\ NOTE: You must include the '..' above.

Click 'Configure' button.  When asked, you should choose 'MinGW Makefiles'
as generator.

There's a problem with MinGW Makefiles on Win2K. If you're compiling on this
platform, use 'MSYS Makefiles' generator instead.

All dependencies should be picked up automatically, if you have set up the
Paths correctly. The only thing you need to change is the installation
destination (CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX) and/or set 'Debug'.

For compatibility with NSIS packaging scripts I recommend to leave the
install prefix to its default.

When configuration is done, click 'OK' to exit the setup utility.

== Compilation and installation ==
 
 
``` 
 make
 make install 
```

== Run openmodeller.exe from the directory where it's installed (CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX) ==

Make sure to copy all .dll:s needed to the same directory as the openmodeller.exe
binary is installed to, if not already done so, otherwise openModeller will complain
about missing libraries when started.

The best way to do this is to download both the openModeller current release installer
package from http://openmodeller.sf.net and install it (make sure to get the mingw build). Now copy
the installation dir from C:\Program Files\openModeller into c:\Program
Files\openmodeller-0.5.2 (or whatever the current version is. The name should strictly
match the version no.) After making this copy you can uninstall the release
version of openModeller from your c:\Program Files directory using the provided
uninstaller. Double check that the openModeller dir is completely gone under
program files afterwards.
   
Another possibility is to run openmodeller.exe when your path contains
c:\msys\local\bin and c:\msys\local\lib directories, so the DLLs will be
used from that place.


== Create the installation package: (optional) ==

Downlad and install NSIS from (http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page)


Now using windows explorer, enter the install_win directory in your openModeller source
tree. Read the README file there and follow the instructions. Next right click
on openmodeller.nsi and choose the option 'Compile NSIS Script'. 



% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% ----Please leave this break marker here for clarity - it wont be rendered ---
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------


= Building under Windows using MSVC Express =

Tim Sutton, 2007

== System preparation ==

I started with a clean XP install with Service Pack 2 and all patches applied.
I have already compiled all the dependencies you need for gdal, expat etc,
so this tutorial won't cover compiling those from source too. Since compiling 
these dependencies was a somewhat painful task I hope my precompiled libs 
will be adequate. If not I suggest you consult the individual projects for
specific build documentation and support. Lets go over the process in a nutshell 
before we begin:

 - Install XP (I used a Parallels virtual machine)
 - Install the premade libraries archive I have made for you
 - Install Visual Studio Express 2005 sp1
 - Install the Microsoft Platform SDK
 - Install command line subversion client
 - Install library dependencies bundle
 - Check out openModeller sources
 - Compile openModeller
 - Create setup.exe installer for openModeller


== Install the libraries archive ==

Half of the point of this section of the MSVC setup procedure is to make 
things as simple as possible for you. To that end I have prepared an
archive that includes all dependencies needed to build openModeller. Fetch 
the archive from:

```
http://openmodeller.cria.org.br/download/extlibs/msvc/omlibs-release.zip
```

/!\ **Note:** If you wish to build the dependencies yourself, detailed notes 
are available in the QGIS source tree INSTALL document.

Create the following directory structure:

```
c:\dev\cpp\
```

And then extract the libraries archive into a subdirectory of the above
directory so that you end up with:

```
c:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release
```

/!\ Note that you are not obliged to use this directory layout, but you 
should adjust any instructions that follow if you plan to do things 
differently.

== Install Visual Studio Express 2005 ==

First thing we need to get is MSVC Express from here:

http://www.microsoft.com/express/2005/

Click on "Download Now" under the Visual C++ 2005 image. The next page is a bit 
confusing so don't feel bad if you cant actually find the download at first! 
There are six coloured blocks on the page for the various studio family members 
(vb / c# / j# etc). Simply choose your language under the 'select your language' 
combo under the yellow C++ block, and your download will begin. Under internet 
explorer I had to disable popup blocking for the download to be able to commence.

Once the setup commences you will be prompted with various options. Here is what 
I chose :

 - Send useage information to Microsoft   (No)
 - Install options:
   - Graphical IDE                        (Yes)
   - Microsoft MSDN Express Edition       (No)
   - Microsoft SQL Server Express Edition (No)
 - Install to folder: C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\   (default)
 
It will need to download around 90mb of installation files and reports 
that the install will consume 554mb of disk space.


== Install Microsoft Platform SDK2 ==

Go to this page:

http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/express/aa700755.aspx

Start by using the link provided on the above page to download and install the
platform SDK2.

The actual SDK download page is once again a bit confusing since the links for 
downloading are hidden amongst a bunch of other links. Basically look for these 
three links with their associated 'Download' buttons and choose the correct 
link for your platform:

```
PSDK-amd64.exe  1.2 MB  Download 
PSDK-ia64.exe   1.3 MB  Download 
PSDK-x86.exe    1.2 MB  Download
```


When you install make sure to choose 'custom install'. These instructions 
assume you are installing into the default path of:

```
C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\
```

We will go for the minimal install that will give us a working environment, 
so on the custom installation screen I made the following choices:


```
Configuration Options
  + Register Environmental Variables            (Yes)
Microsoft Windows Core SDK
  + Tools                                       (Yes)
    + Tools (AMD 64 Bit)                        (No unless this applies)
    + Tools (Intel 64 Bit)                      (No unless this applies)
  + Build Environment
    + Build Environment (AMD 64 Bit)            (No unless this applies)
    + Build Environment (Intel 64 Bit)          (No unless this applies)
    + Build Environment (x86 32 Bit)            (Yes)
  + Documentation                               (No)
  + Redistributable Components                  (Yes)
  + Sample Code                                 (No)
  + Source Code                                 (No)
    + AMD 64 Source                             (No)
    + Intel 64 Source                           (No)
Microsoft Web Workshop                          (Yes) (needed for shlwapi.h)
  + Build Environment                           (Yes)
  + Documentation                               (No)
  + Sample Code                                 (No)
  + Tools                                       (No)
Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS) SDK (No)
Microsoft Data Access Services (MDAC) SDK       (Yes) (needed by GDAL for odbc)
  + Tools
    + Tools (AMD 64 Bit)                        (No)
    + Tools (AMD 64 Bit)                        (No)
    + Tools (x86 32 Bit)                        (Yes)
  + Build Environment
    + Tools (AMD 64 Bit)                        (No)
    + Tools (AMD 64 Bit)                        (No)
    + Tools (x86 32 Bit)                        (Yes)
  + Documentation                               (No)
  + Sample Code                                 (No)
Microsodt Installer SDK                         (No)
Microsoft Table PC SDK                          (No)
Microsoft Windows Management Instrumentation    (No)
Microsoft DirectShow SDK                        (No)
Microsoft Media Services SDK                    (No)
Debuggin Tools for Windows                      (Yes)
```

/!\ Note that you can always come back later to add extra bits if you like.

/!\ Note that installing the SDK requires validation with the 
Microsoft Genuine Advantage application. Some people have a philosophical 
objection to installing this software on their computers. If you are one 
of them you should probably consider using the MINGW build instructions 
described elsewhere in this document.


The SDK installs a directory called

```
C:\Office10
```

Which you can safely remove.

After the SDK is installed, follow the remaining notes on the page link 
above to get your MSVC Express environment configured correctly. For your 
convenience, these are summarised again below, and I have added a couple 
more paths that I discovered were needed:

1) open Visual Studio Express IDE

2) Tools -> Options -> Projects and Solutions -> VC++ Directories

3) Add:
```
Executable files: 
  C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Bin

Include files: 
  C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include
  C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include\atl
  C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include\mfc
Library files: C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Lib
```

4) Close MSVC Express IDE

5) Open the following file with notepad:

```
C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\VCProjectDefaults\corewin_express.vsprops
```

and change the property:

```
AdditionalDependencies="kernel32.lib"
```

To read:

```
AdditionalDependencies="kernel32.lib user32.lib gdi32.lib winspool.lib comdlg32.lib 
                        advapi32.lib shell32.lib ole32.lib oleaut32.lib uuid.lib"
```

The notes go on to show how to build a mswin32 application which you can try if you like - 
I'm not going to recover that here.

== Edit your vsvars ==

Backup your vsvars32.bat file in 

```
C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\Tools
```

and replace it with this one:

```
@SET VSINSTALLDIR=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8
@SET VCINSTALLDIR=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC
@SET FrameworkDir=C:\WINDOWS\Microsoft.NET\Framework
@SET FrameworkVersion=v2.0.50727
@SET FrameworkSDKDir=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\SDK\v2.0
@if "%VSINSTALLDIR%"=="" goto error_no_VSINSTALLDIR
@if "%VCINSTALLDIR%"=="" goto error_no_VCINSTALLDIR

@echo Setting environment for using Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 x86 tools.

@rem
@rem Root of Visual Studio IDE installed files.
@rem
@set DevEnvDir=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\IDE

@set PATH=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\IDE;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\BIN;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\Tools;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\SDK\v2.0\bin;C:\WINDOWS\Microsoft.NET\Framework\v2.0.50727;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\VCPackages;%PATH%
@rem added by Tim
@set PATH=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Bin;%PATH%
@set INCLUDE=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\INCLUDE;%INCLUDE%
@rem added by Tim
@set INCLUDE=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include;%INCLUDE%
@set INCLUDE=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include\mfc;%INCLUDE%
@set INCLUDE=%INCLUDE%;C:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release\include\postgresql
@set LIB=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\LIB;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\SDK\v2.0\lib;%LIB%
@rem added by Tim
@set LIB=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Lib;%LIB%
@set LIB=%LIB%;C:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release\lib
@set LIBPATH=C:\WINDOWS\Microsoft.NET\Framework\v2.0.50727

@goto end

:error_no_VSINSTALLDIR
@echo ERROR: VSINSTALLDIR variable is not set. 
@goto end

:error_no_VCINSTALLDIR
@echo ERROR: VCINSTALLDIR variable is not set. 
@goto end

:end

```

== Environment Variables ==

Right click on 'My computer' then select the 'Advanced' tab. Click environment variables and 
create or augment the following **System** variables (if they dont already exist):

```
Variable Name:     Value:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
EDITOR             vim
INCLUDE            C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include\.
LIB                C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Lib\.
LIB_DIR            C:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release
PATH               C:\Program Files\CMake 2.4\bin;
                   %SystemRoot%\system32;
                   %SystemRoot%;
                   %SystemRoot%\System32\Wbem;
                   C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Bin\.;
                   C:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Bin\WinNT\;
                   C:\Program Files\svn\bin;C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\bin;
                   C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\IDE;
                   "c:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\Common7\Tools";
                   "C:\Program Files\PuTTY"
SVN_SSH            "C:\\Program Files\\PuTTY\\plink.exe"
                   (Note the double slashes above are not a mistake!)
```

== Install CMake ==

Download and install cmake 2.4.7 or better, making sure to enable the 
option

```
Update path for all users
```

== Install Subversion ==

You **must** install the command line version if you want the CMake svn scripts to work.
Its a bit tricky to find the correct version on the subversion download site as they have 
som misleadingly named similar downloads. Easiest is to just get this file:

http://subversion.tigris.org/downloads/1.4.5-win32/apache-2.2/svn-win32-1.4.5.zip

Extract the zip file to

```
C:\Program Files\svn
```

And then add

```
C:\Program Files\svn\bin
```

To your path.


== Initial SVN Check out ==

Open a cmd.exe window and do:


```
cd \
cd dev
cd cpp
svn co https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/openmodeller/trunk/openmodeller
```

At this point you will probably get a message like this:

```
C:\dev\cpp>svn co https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net/repos/openmodeller/trunk/openmodeller
Error validating server certificate for 'https://openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net:443':
 - The certificate is not issued by a trusted authority. Use the
   fingerprint to validate the certificate manually!
Certificate information:
 - Hostname: openmodeller.svn.sourceforge.net
 - Valid: from Sat, 01 Apr 2006 03:30:47 GMT until Fri, 21 Mar 2008 03:30:47 GMT
 - Issuer: Developer Team, openModeller, Anchorage, Alaska, US
 - Fingerprint: 2f:cd:f1:5a:c7:64:da:2b:d1:34:a5:20:c6:15:67:28:33:ea:7a:9b
(R)eject, accept (t)emporarily or accept (p)ermanently?
```

Press 'p' to accept and the svn checkout will commence.

== Create Makefiles using cmakesetup.exe ==

I wont be giving a detailed description of the build process, because 
the process is explained in the first section (where you manually build 
all dependencies) of the windows build notes in this document. Just skip 
past the parts where you need to build GDAL etc, since this simplified 
install process does all the dependency provisioning for you.

```
cd openmodeller
mkdir build
cd build
cmakesetup ..
```

Press "Configure" after the cmakesetup gui appears. Cmakesetup should 
find all dependencies for you automatically (it uses the LIB_DIR environment 
to find them all in c:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release). If you get an error saying 
that g77 (Fortran compiler) was not found, turn off the option "WITH_FORTRAN"
in the end of the settings list. This will disable the L-BFGS training method 
in the Maximum Entropy algorithm, which requires a Fortran compiler. 
You should also find the CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX option in the beginning of the 
settings list to make sure that it contains the openModeller version (X.X.X) as
part of the last directory name. If not, then manually append the version so 
that it becomes:

```
c:\Program Files\openModellerX.X.X
```

This is necessary for compatibility with the NSIS packaging script.

Press "Configure" again and when all the red fields are gone, and you have made 
any additional personalisations to the setup, press "OK" to close the cmake gui.

Now open Visual Studio Express and do:

File -> Open -> Project / Solution

Now open the cmake generated openModeller solution which should be in :

```
c:\dev\cpp\openmodeller\build\openmodeller.sln
```

Currently I have only made release built dependencies for openModeller 
(debug versions will follow in future), so you need to be sure to select 
'Release' from the solution configurations toolbar.

Next, right click on ALL_BUILD in the solution browser, and then choose build.

Sometimes (depending on your version of the MS SDK platform) you may face the 
following error when compiling the openmodeller project:

```
Linking...
LINK : fatal error LNK1104: cannot open file 'atlthunk.lib'
```

In this case, you can comment (add a "//" in the beginning of) line 293 in the file 
C:\Program files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\Include\atl\atlbase.h 

The line will look like this:

```
//#pragma comment(lib, "atlthunk.lib")
```

After that, try rebuilding the whole project.

Once the build completes with no errors, right click on INSTALL in the solution browser 
and choose build. This will by default install openmodeller into 
c:\Program Files\openModellerX.X.X which will be used to create the installation
package.

== Packaging ==

To run openModeller you need to at the minimum copy the DLLs from 
c:\dev\cpp\omlibs-release\bin into the c:\program files\openmodellerX.X.X directory. 
If you are unsure about which DLL and configuration files should be copied, then
download the last installation package for Windows, install it and then inspect
the installation directory to check which files are needed. In other words: the option
INSTALL in the solution browser **does not** copy all files needed to create the 
package. The best approach is probably to install the latest version of openModeller,
make a parallel copy of the entire installation directory, rename the new directory so 
that it uses the same version number that you are using, and run the INSTALL option 
again to overwrite all files that were changed since the last release. Then it should 
be OK to use NSIS.

Download and install NSIS from (http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page)

Now using windows explorer, enter the install_win directory in your openModeller source
tree. Read the README file there and follow the instructions. Next, right click
on openmodeller.nsi and choose the option 'Compile NSIS Script'. 

== Testing ==

After creating the package, press "Test installer" to install a copy on your machine.
Create a new environment variable called OM_ALG_PATH pointing to the "algs" 
subdirectory of the installation directory:

```
c:\Program Files\openModeller X.X.X\algs
```

Edit the environment variable "Path" to add the openModeller installation directory.

Then open the cmd window, go to the "examples" subdirectory inside the installation
directory and type:

```
om_console request.txt
```

== Debugging ==

To Debug on Windows:

 1. Set om_console as startup project: right click on "om_console" project, then click on "Set as StartUp Project"

 2. Set the working directory and command argument: right click on "om_console" project, click on "Properties -> Configure Properties \ Debugging". Now set "Working Directory" as C:\dev\cpp\openmodeller\examples and set "Command Arguments" as request_w.txt


= Authors and Acknowledgments =

 Tim Sutton 2007. Parts of this document were adapted from QGIS build notes 
 I and others wrote I acknowledge the follow people who contributed to that original document:


- Windows MINGW Section
 - Tim Sutton, Godofredo Contreras 2006
 - CMake additions Magnus Homann 2007
 - Python additions Martin Dobias 2007
 - With thanks to Tisham Dhar for preparing the initial msys environment

- Windows MSVC Section 
 - Tim Sutton 2007
 - David Willis 2007
 - MSVC install additions Tim Sutton 2007
 - Juergen Fischer 2007
 - Alexandre Jardim 2008

- OSX Section
 - Tim Sutton, 2007
 - With special thanks to Tom Elwertowski and William Kyngesburye

- GNU/Linux Section
 - Tim Sutton 2006

